---
layout: post
title: "The FT Top 50 Journals"
---

# [The FT 50:](https://www.ft.com/content/3405a512-5cbb-11e1-8f1f-00144feabdc0#axzz4J5U4V1EX)

1. Academy of Management Journal
2. Academy of Management Review
3. _Accounting, Organizations and Society_
4. Administrative Science Quarterly
5. __American Economic Review__
6. __Contemporary Accounting Research__
7. __Econometrica__
8. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
9. Harvard Business Review
10. Human Relations*
11. Human Resource Management
12. Information Systems Research
13. __Journal of Accounting and Economics__
14. __Journal of Accounting Research__
15. Journal of Applied Psychology
16. Journal of Business Ethics
17. Journal of Business Venturing
18. Journal of Consumer Psychology
19. Journal of Consumer Research
20. __Journal of Finance__
21. __Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis__
22. __Journal of Financial Economics__
23. Journal of International Business Studies
24. Journal of Management*
25. Journal of Management Information Systems*
26. Journal of Management Studies
27. Journal of Marketing
28. Journal of Marketing Research
29. Journal of Operations Management
30. __Journal of Political Economy__
31. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science*
32. __Management Science__
33. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management*
34. Marketing Science
35. MIS Quarterly
36. Operations Research
37. Organization Science
38. Organization Studies
39. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
40. Production and Operations Management
41. __Quarterly Journal of Economics__
42. Research Policy*
43. __Review of Accounting Studies__
44. __Review of Economic Studies*__
45. _Review of Finance*_
46. _Review of Financial Studies_
47. Sloan Management Review
48. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal*
49. Strategic Management Journal
50. __The Accounting Review__

\* indicates new additions