---
title: 2021-03-13
categories:
  - coding
tags:
  - zshell, bash, commandline
published: true 
---

## undoing a wayword unzip

Say you've archived some results by zipping the folder they are in. This is a
common part of my workflow when I'm getting ready to ship a set of results.
While I'm working I pipe all my tables to a folder called `/tabs/`, which is
sync'd to the overleaf document that holds the draft. Then before submitting
I'll zip the folder and [rerun my code (I always do this
twice)](https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2022/11/28/who-said-i-dont-trust-anything-until-it-runs-in-fact-i-dont-trust-anything-until-it-runs-twice/),[^ahm]
this way I don't ship anything stale. 

Now, if you've ever unzipped a file in a GUI you probably did it by double
clicking on the zipped folder and waited happily while your OS unzipped the
contents into a sensibly named folder. So, based on this habit, if you're like
me, once and awhile you accidentally:

```zshell
unzip archive.zip
```

which obligingly sprays the contents of `archive.zip` all the files all over
the current directory. This is probably never what you wanted.

Doing it right is easy enough, unzip just needs a destination (`-d`):

```zshell
mkdir archive 
unzip archive.zip -d ./archive
```

Undoing this is a one line thing... but since I don't make this mistake more
than a couple of times per year I never remember exactly how to clean it up
without having to manually delete all of the files (sometimes this can be a lot
of files). The solution takes advantage of the fact that `unzip` knows all the
names of the files in the `.zip` so you can use `unzip -Z -1 archive.zip` to
get the names (`-Z` is actually right at the top of the man page and often
aliased to `zipinfo`, and `-1` restricts the output of `unzip -Z` to just the
file names. This is great, because a list of filenames is just the sort of
think that we can pipe via `xargs` to `rm` and have our nice tidy directory
back. Since the output of `unzip -Z -1` is one file name per line, we'll use
the `-I` option to execute command (`rm`) once for each line of what we are
piping. 

```zshell
unzip -Z -1 archive.zip | xargs -I{} rm -v {}
```

The first set of `{}` is telling the pipe (`|`) where to put the list of files,
and the second set is telling `xargs` where to put each filename. The `-v`
option (`--verbose`) just tells you the names of the files as they are removed.
And just like that you're back where you started.

[^ahm]: My great, and likely only, contribution to the practice of applied
    statistics is that I reminded Andrew Gelman that he is indeed the one who
said: "Computer programming is basically the last bastion of rigor in the
modern world. I don't trust anything until it runs. In fact, until it runs
twice on the computer."
