---
published: true 
title: "2021-04-13"
category: "writing"
tags:
    - book 
    - schumpeter 
---

The 'box' in _The Box_ by Marc Levinson is a shipping container.

You should read this book even if you are not, like I am, an absolute sucker
for detailed descriptions of how things work. If you are like me you've
likely already read it.

The blurb from the New York times reads "\[A\] classic tale of trial and error,
and of creative destruction ..." and that's why I think you should read it. We
so often blithely cite competition, disruption, creative destruction, and their
spoils as the engine of the free market, with little thought to the actual
mechanics of how this plays out in real life. _The Box_ is indeed a detailed
look at creative destruction, and one that illuminates the messy unpredictable
ways that it moves forward. Those of us who saw disruption as the internet
slowly eating newspapers or Uber making taxis more efficient can be forgiven
for thinking this process is rather bloodless. Two details illustrate:

## Longshoremen

I'd heard the term. I didn't realize, or rather, I had never considered how
goods got off of ships, and I hadn't considered the fact that ships that aren't
designed around shipping containers were actually loaded and unloaded by people
walking onto the ships, lifting the stuff and carrying it off. This took a lot
of people. So many that the location of ports required space for people to live
near them. Changing the way that we containerize goods, and the way that we
load and unload ships didn't just change the cost of shipping. It changed the
shape of ships, it changed the location of ports; now you needed easy access to
rail and road more than you needed access to armies of Longshoremen. This
changed the composition of neighborhoods and the composition and fabric of
cities across the world. The detail with which this change in society is
covered in the book is useful, and highlights the human impact of technological
change. I'm not here to litigate who won and who lost in this transition, as
it's happened and what is left for us is to learn from it. But, I think it's an
excellent backdrop against which we should view any discussion of massive
technological changes that alter the nature of work. It gives a sense  of scale
that we loose if the most real example is Uber allowing you to hail a taxi, it
changes how ride hailing works, but there is still a human at the wheel. _The
Box_ replaced neighborhoods with a crane operator perched on rails high above a
shipping yard.

This is a serious issue. It seems that if we want the dynamism of creative
destruction---and I'm certainly not nostalgic for dock work that I never
did---then we need to think carefully about the safety nets that catch the
folks whose livelihoods are caught up in progress. There is a Beckerian thread
to pull here as the very areas that were populated by Longshoremen became high
crime areas once the work at the docks left. It might be too glib to
suggestively point to the fall in the legal value of skills and the rise in
crime, but this link is worth considering.  

## Who got rich?

The classic story of American innovation features an entrepreneur that invents
something that changes the world and in the process it makes them rich. The
transition to the shipping container is a string of bankruptcies. Not because
the technology was wrong (i.e. the trials and errors, though there were those),
but because the time and sheet scale of the capital investments needed for the
shipping container to truly take hold. For adoption to reach transformative
levels entire fleets of ships and a global network of ports had to be
constructed. To say nothing of the shipping containers themselves. Today the
shipping industry survives more because it is essential rather than because it
is profitable.

I keep coming back to the book because of these two things. A reminder of the
human side of creative destruction, and the puzzle of an innovation that
persistently disappointed those that pursued it, and almost in spite of them,
came into being. 



