---
title: '2021-01-08'
categories:
  - coding
tags:
  - todo lists
  - z shell 
published: true
---

A really simple "todo" list command line tool.

I work in text files nearly 100% of the time. One of the many things this lets
me do is drop "todo" items into comments wherever I am. Most often these are
relevant to the point in the file that I'm working, but generally the goal is
to get the item out of my mind and into writing as quickly as possible without
breaking my flow in the current project. While I'm working you see a ton of
comments like this:

```
# TODO: python style todo comment
// TODO: stata style todo comment 
% TODO: latex style todo comment 
```

You get the point. It's nothing fancy, just a comment with `TODO:` in it. This
isn't a system though, it really just makes a mess, all of these todo items
strewn about my projects! 

__But__, it's really simple to make this into something much more useful. To
find all of the `TODO:` items in your project just head to the root directory
of the project and type:

```bash
grep -nr "TODO:" .  
``` 

And you'll get a stdout something like this:

```bash
./2021-01-08-todo_list.md:15:# TODO: python style todo comment
./2021-01-08-todo_list.md:16:// TODO: stata style todo comment 
./2021-01-08-todo_list.md:17:% TODO: latex style todo comment 
```

It will be a list of all the files and line numbers where these `TODO:` items
occur (`-n` give you the line number), in the current directory and all the
subdirectories (`-r` makes this recursive). To make this into something like a
cli tool I just dropped the following line into my `.zshrc`:

```bash
alias todo='grep -nr "TODO:" . > todo.txt;cat todo.txt'
```

And as I work my way through my projects I just type `todo` in my terminal to
capture a list of all the unfinished items I'm leaving behind. At the end of
any session I'll just check for anything that should get clarified or pulled
out to other projects or notes, and then I leave myself a little list of what I
need to tidy up when I come back.

