---
title: 2022-02-24
categories:
  - writing
tags:
  - ukraine
published: true
---

Слава Україні! По всій землі слава!

The invasion[^when] of Ukraine by Putin's Russia[^rus] has solidified two simple things in my mind.[^fin]

1. Everyone has the right to stay where they live, and to leave.[^obv]
2. No one should be in harm's way just because they were born in one place
   rather than another.

[^when]:
    I'm posting this on the data of the beginning of Putin's overt attempt
    to take Kiev, but Ukraine has been the subject of an illegal and inhumane
    occupation by military forces under Putin's control, and other [acts of
    war](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petya_(malware_family)>) for a decade.

[^fin]:
    I wrote this down as I watched the invasion unfold. It has taken me
    some time to actually publish the post. The footnotes were written much
    later and reference things that were written in response to the invasion. The
    ensuing time has been a struggle with myself about what I could say and do to
    help. At the end of the day the answer has been not much, I've volunteered
    small amounts (in the grand scheme of things) of time and money to various
    parts of the effort to defend Ukraine, but my skills and resources don't match
    the type and magnitude of the problem. I'm publishing this as I near the 20th
    anniversary of my return to the US from Ukraine, where I lived from 2002 to 2004.

[^obv]:
    I'm obviously thinking of this in the context of the war in Ukraine,
    and not thinking about evictions, foreclosures, the US housing crisis,
    eminent domain, the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, and a host of other
    thorny issues. Though, this does influence my thinking on those topics as well.

[^rus]:
    We could have a long and productive talk about why naming a state bent
    on the erasure of Ukraine is among the grossest of appropriations, but
    instead I'll point to [Timothy Snyder's excellent course on the making of
    modern
    Ukraine](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLh9mgdi4rNewfxO7LhBoz_1Mx1MaO6sw_),
    and [commentary on Putin's conversation with the craven credulous Tucker
    Carlson](https://snyder.substack.com/p/putins-genocidal-myth). I'll also note
    that I like the approach of referring to what I'm calling "Putin's Russia" as
    "Muscovy" taken by Brad DeLong and others. I like it because it demonstrates
    that the writer using it understand the history of the repeated experiments at
    empire and appropriation by the polity based in Moscow. However, I'm sticking
    with "Putin's Russia" for three reasons. First, it places emphasis on the
    person who alone started the conflict, and who alone can end it. There is a
    glib version of this where I note that, Putin started this war and he can end
    this war, but there is a deeper more fundamental version of this where I note
    that ["Armies generally do not win by exterminating the enemy, but by making
    the enemy stop fighting, give up and run away." (the linked ACOUP post is
    _highly
    recommended_)](https://acoup.blog/2020/05/22/collections-the-battle-of-helms-deep-part-iv-men-of-rohan/).
    Russian troops can go home as soon as Putin lets them, the Ukrainians that have
    to give up and run away for the war to end are all of them. I'm not being
    hyperbolic: [Putin's goal is the elimination of the Ukrainian state and
    people](https://snyder.substack.com/p/russias-eugenic-war). But I also want to
    emphasize that this is Putin's war and that we should be careful to not to
    conflate Putin with the Russian people. Second, I think that it is more clear
    to more readers. Third, as an homage to the excellent book _Putin's Russia_ by
    Anna Politkovskaya, a book for which she arguably gave her life.
