---
published: true 
title: "2022-01-13"
category: "coding"
tags:
    - nvim 
    - terminal
    - zsh
---

foreground a stopped job in `zsh`:

I always hit `^z` when I'm trying to hit `^x` in vim. This stops the current
process and sends you back to the shell, a startling but potentially
useful--when done intentionally-- thing to do. If you're a recovering Microsoft
user you're used to nothing being saved ever, where as vim is always writing to
a swap file so it's quite difficult to accidentally nuke what you were working
on in vim. You can close your terminal and the buffer will still be there in
the swap file, you can shut off your computer and the same thing will happen.
Now, how to get that process (your editor) back after you purposefully... or
not ... hit `^z`.

```
jobs 
```

will tell you the name of the process. It's also written to the terminal when
you hit ^z, so if you did this by accident it's right there. For example, say
I'm editing my syllabus in `nvim` and I hit `^z` now _bam_ I'm back in the
terminal and I see:

```
[1]  + 30607 suspended  nvim acctg3210Syl.md
```

I can get it back with `fg` (which brings jobs back to the foreground).

```
fg %1
```

`1` is referring to `[1]` the job id. I know there are better ways to jump
around projects inside of vim, but I am really starting to get used to this as
a way to edit functions that I've defined outside of the file that I'm working
in. This is particularly useful in python where the project path helpfully includes the folder of the file you are running so it makes sense to have everything sitting nearby.
