---
title: "2022-12-10"
categories:
  - coding 
  - talking 
tags:
  - beamer
  - markdown 
published: false
---

markdown killed the beamer star

I'm a huge fan of beamer, but I'm prepping new materials for a course this year and I feel like it's tripping me up a little. It's not that I can't get beamer to do exactly what I want... the opposite in fact. Here's what I'm looking for:

### Low startup costs / time

Often I'll come into my office with a head full of ideas that I just need to get onto paper and the faster the better. This is not beamer's strong suit. I don't want to monkey around with boiler plate with a head full of ideas, and I don't want to have to write things in a note either. I want my notes to be as close to the actual production slides as possible.

This is no problem if I'm prepping a presentation for a paper that is just going to it's first presentation at a conference (especially if my coauthors use Beamer as well). Since we'll probably present this paper based on the same slide deck for a couple of years while the paper works it's way through the review process I'm not to bothered by the steep start up costs there. But right now I'm working on 28 lectures, and I just need things to be as low friction as possible.

In short I want to write slides in markdown.

### Small menu of formatting choices 

Power point is no good for me for a host of reasons, but on this dimension I can get lost for hours learning what is possible for power point to do. Some of that stuff is super cool, but that' s not why I'm here and that's not why I'm going to present. I'm here to make a presentation based on something that I know a ton about and the people I'm talking to don't. 

My beloved Beamer/LaTeX falls down a bit here too. While I find writing a paper in LaTeX to be a joy, because nearly of my keystrokes an mental energy are directly into _content_, Bteamer presentations have the wrong ratio... most of my writing turns out to be formatting things just so. Again, for a paper that's going into it's first conference this is probably worth it. For other things I just don't think so. 

I just want to write slides in markdown... as I said.

### Easy to edit on the fly

This less of a concern for the conference presentations I prepare (especially when I have coauthors), but for this course I'm doing for the first time this year I think this is a must. Just like start up time, where I need the time I'm working to be all about pouring content into the  slides and nothing else, I need the content to easy for me to fix. I give my self pretty fixed parameters for how much prep time I can spend per class so that I don't fall behind on research and miss tenure with only a few beautiful decks of slides about managerial accounting to show for it. Since the result is a presentation that I made quickly I need to be able to correct ytypos on the fly.

Power point requires you to exit the slide show and make the changes and then relaunch the slide show. This is a bit a of a break, but it's better than other options.
Beamer is almost completely unfeasible for this. You have to recompile and edit the code in the background. Then the new render will likely require you to relaunch your pdf viewer. This would never happen in a workshop or conference, and would just be too much of an interruption to the flow of a class. 

This means that I `pandoc` the great and powerful is also not the solution here.

###  I need some sort of live interpreter for something like R, Stata, or Python.
- This really narrows the options, but a key part of my value add for the Advanced Managerial Course that I'm teaching is to shift the course from being based in Excel to being based in Python (we can have a discussion about why python vs. something else... the short answer is that I don't care what you use as long as works).
- Since managerial accounting is just assembling algorithms and data in order to inform decisions most of what I do is introduce a concept, show an algorithm that captures the concept, a data structure that informs it and then I visualize the insight that comes from that combination. 

### The solution for now:

To address issues 1 & 2 a came across Markdown + `pandoc`. You can just sit down and start writing in markdown and the # headers become slides. It's pretty incredible. There's really nothing in between you and the creation of the next slide. I find that this is super useful for basics, but I demonstrate a fair about of coding live and like to integrate a decent amount of data visualization directly into my slides. WHile I certainly can create graphics separately and import them like you would a figure, I'm still looking for more imediavy in composition and the ability to teach those data skills interactively.


