---
title: '2025-12-08'
categories:
  - writing
tags:
  - markdown
  - ai
  - copy editing
published: true
---

An AI-based copy editing workflow for the punctilious. 

A few things happened. 

1. My brilliant cousin Peter Conti-Brown mentioned that he uses AI to copy edit
   his writing on Substack ([SUBSCRIBE!](https://petercontibrown.substack.com/)).
2. The AAA updated it's policy on AI use in writing. 
3. HKUST stopped letting us use our research funds to hire copy editors.

This is a big topic. Briefly, use case \#1 is transformational. Low cost copy
editing is fantastic, \#3 is a loss for me. The copy editor that I have had the
pleasure of working with, [Julie
Stieff](https://taubmancollege.umich.edu/faculty/directory/julie-steiff/), has
taught me everything that I know about the mechanics of writing, though she
should not be held responsible for all of the glaring deficiencies that remain.
The quality of feedback from a true professional is irreplaceable. But, it takes
time and money. So, here is the workflow that I have developed.

## The input: 

I write in Neovim using a mix of Markdown and LaTeX, and I use Raycast to
interact with various LLMs.[^ray] This means that it is natural for me to have a
file called something like `/proj/draft/intro.md` which I can pop into my paste
buffer from the command line (`cat intro.md | pbcopy`), then launch Raycast AI
(I have this on "Meh-i" where Meh is key programmed to send all the modifier
keys at once), select the raycast preset for copy editing, and paste the file
into the LLM interface. 

The preset I have created is just GPT-5 with the following prompt:

```
Please copy edit the following section of a document that is being prepared with pandoc markdown. Please only make gramatical changes and typographical corrections with minimal disturbance of the document. In particular, you should not convert any LaTeX or markdown markup. for example items surrounded by dollar signs should not be convered (e.g. $\times$) and em-dashes should remain "---" and not be converted, and en-dashes should remain "--" and not be converted. Please place your response in code fences, and enjoy (but behave yourself). Thanks, love you, bye.
```

Most of this is pretty obvious, but I'm doing a few things here to keep the
output clean. First, the reason that I'm asking it to do as little as possible,
is that I want to be able to directly compare the two documents. I'm looking for
typos, grammatical errors, and the like. But I want to still sound like my weird
idiosyncratic self, and I want to be able to quickly identify the changes.
Second, I don't want the LLM to get confused by the dialect of Markdown and
LaTeX that I'm using (i.e. whatever came out of my fingers). Third, I'm being
nice to the LLM for no other reason than that I am not always a particularly
serious person. 

Okay, this usually works nicely, and gives me back an edited copy in a code
block so I can click the GUI copy button and get it into my paste buffer (where
stuff sits waiting for you to paste it). 

Now, on to incorporating the changes.


[^ray]: I highly recommend [Raycast](https://www.raycast.com/) if you are a Mac
    user. I use it as my primary app launcher, clipboard manager, window
manager, automator, and LLM interface. There are three reasons why it is great
for working with LLMs: (1) you can launch it with a keystroke as use it as a
native app, rather than in a browser; (2) Raycast lets you switch between models
on the fly, so you can use GPT-{3,4,5}, Claude, or whatever you want without changing
apps; (3) Raycast allows me to use these LLMs without a VPN. 

## What to do with the output:

My objective here is to create a workflow that allows me to integrate edits
quickly, something like the speed at which you can correct spelling errors in
Word, but without YOLOing large chunks of text from the LLM into my draft. 

Here is what I've settled on: 

1. Drop the LLM edited text into a new buffer in Neovim, and save that with some
   title like `intro_ed.md`. 
2. Then use `vimdiff` to open the two files: `vimdiff intro*` (if you only have
   intro.md and intro_ed.md in the folder).

This puts the original on the left, and the edited version on the right, and
allows you to jump between changes with `]c` and `[c`, and use `do` and `dp` to
push and pull changes between the two buffers, and all of your other vim
incantations work here as well. My favorite is using `:%s/old/new/g` to make a
change everywhere at the same time. 

Notice that I'm never dumping text directly into my draft, instead I'm selecting
changes and either typing them in, or pulling them with `dp` and `do`. This
means that I am always between the LLM and my draft. This is similar to how I
recommend researchers work with sources: __never__ copy and paste directly from
a source into your draft. Always have an intermediate step where you are typing
so that you don't plagiarize by mistake. I've caught a few chunks of text like
this when refereeing over the years. This is a preventable mistake.[^monkey]

[^monkey]: If this sounds like more typing than you would like to do, you can
    get faster: [monkeytype.com](https://monkeytype.com/).
