---
title: '2025-11-01'
categories:
  - reading
tags:
  - statistics
  - fisher 
published: true
---

What are statistics for? 

Reading [_Causal Inference in Statistics_ by Pearl, Glymour, and Jewell](https://www.amazon.com/Causal-Inference-Statistics-Judea-Pearl/dp/1119186846?crid=AV1XQTBQWRYG&keywords=causal+inference+in+statistics+a+primer&sprefix=causal+inference+in+statis%2Caps%2C470) this
morning,[^sterp] and the following stopped me in my tracks:

> "In Ronald Fisher's influential manifesto, he pronounced that 'the object of
> statistics is the reduction of data' (Fisher 1922). In keeping with that aim,
> the traditional task of making sense of data, often referred to generically as
> 'inference,' became that of finding a parsimonious mathematical description of
> the joint distribution of a set of variables of interest, or of specific
> parameters of such a distribution."   

Pearl et al. use this to emphasize that the traditional role of statistics is
not to articulate causal relationships. But, the passage jumped out to me
because it is a quote from 100 years ago from someone whose approach to
statistics deeply influences our work today.[^eggs] It's striking if we pause to
think about the information technology of Fisher's day: spreadsheets were paper.
So, being able to reduce a column to a few numbers (moments if you will), was a
huge task and valuable in it's own right. 

I think there is something a little more general here: it's easy for us to
forget the influence of technology on our current practices. Part of why so much
work went into closed form calculations for clustered, and other, standard
errors was simply that bootstrap was time consuming.[^wern] The same is true for
why we use OLS for everything (I'm not knocking OLS here, I use it as much as
possible), maximum likelihood was hard to estimate when most of the foundational
work in many fields was done. I suspect that this is part of the reason why
Fama-Macbeth regressions were so popular, they are a clever solution to the
particular problem at hand, but also a _very_ attractive solution when you had
to run your regressions overnight using punch cards.

[^wern]: In 2006 my Econometrics professor had a separate computer for
    bootstrapping. It would run for days. 

[^eggs]: e.g. our current, though hopefully soon to be outmoded, preoccupation
    with statistical significance is mostly due to---a misreading of---Fisher.  

[^sterp]: because my job is amazing and I can do exactly what I want when I want)


