---
title: '2025-01-06'
categories:
  - coding
tags:
  - python 
  - uv 
  - package management
  - things i learned in 2025
published: true
---

`uv` for managing python packages

My workflow is basically: python --> Stata --> latex/markdown

I use Stata for estimation and Python for everything before that. Mostly
pandas... until recently when polars became mature enough to invest time in. But
I'll have to write about that separately. If you're using Python you'll need a
package manager and a way to manage virtual environments.

You need this for two reasons:

1. Package managers are how you download and keep track of python packages like
   `pandas` and `polars`. Mac OS and Linux ship with Python (often referred to
as "system Python"), but this does not come with the packages you want to use
for data analysis and you don't want to dump a bunch of packages into this
environment.

2. Virtual environments keep track of what you are and are not using
   for a particular project. For example, if you wrote a paper in 2015 with
pandas, the commands you used do not work on the pandas you would get if you
downloaded it today. You'd like to keep that around, and potentially be able to
share it with others if they want to replicate your work.

For a long time I've been using `conda`. `conda` is great at 1. But not so great
at 2. Let's say that I want to create a virtual environment with python 13 and
pandas:

I would:

``` bash
mkdir newproj
cd newproj 
brew install miniconda 
conda init 
conda create --name newproj python=3.13 pandas 
conda activate
```

and now I'm using this version of python and pandas. I can come back to it when
ever I need to, and even if I've updated other versions of python, the version
in this environment will not have changed. However, if I want to share this with
someone else it's a bit fiddly to make sure that yo've actually tracked the
precise versions your code depends on. In particular, notice that the
information about this virtual environment is not, by default, associated with
the project I'm using it in. This is  part of point two point 2 and `uv` solves
this. All of the information about the packages you are using is saved in your
project by default.

Lets say that you are going to start a project called `newproj` and you want to
use the same tools as I used in the `conda` example. Here is what you would do
with `uv`

``` bash
mkdir newproj 
cd newproj 
brew install uv 
uv init 
uv add polars # this is how you 'add' packages
uv venv --python=3.13 
source .venv/bin/activate 
uv sync
```

Now all of the information about the packages you installed (including the
version of pandas that you got but did not specify) are recorded in the newproj
folder. So you can share this folder and someone using it would only need to:

``` bash
cd newproj 
source .venv/bin/activate 
uv sync # TODO: confirm 
```

and they are using the exact same versions that you are. Also if they are
already using UV and have the same versions in another project then they will
not have to download a new version!

There are a few drawbacks, in these cases I fall back to conda:

1. `wrds` requires `scipy` which has non-python dependencies and `uv` doesn't
   handle that well... as in: fails to handle it. So I use `conda` to create an
   environment that has the `wrds` module.
2. that's it. There is no second one.  
